README.md, before:

# Simple PHP Basic Template #

A Simple plain PHP Templating Engine. You can see a running Application on [demo-page](https://www.mvattersen.de/basic).


### Dependencies ###

A running PHP Webserver (A space where you can place PHP Files). I've testet on **apache2** and **nginx** Servers. The Packagenames can variate a little, depending on you operation System:

Neccessarry Pakages:

- php > 7.1
- php_curl

Optional (but usefull) packages:

- git
- php_sqlite3


## Installation ##

Installation ist straight forrward. You just need to clone the current Repossitory:

	git clone https://github.com/vaddi/basic.git

After getting the Base Application, you should copy the `pages` Folder to `sites` to use this for your own Pages:

	cp -r inc/pages inc/sites

Copy the config file:

	cp inc/config.php.example inc/config.php

And Edit the `inc/config.php` File:

```php
// change this
define( 'PAGES',      __DIR__ . "/pages/" );
// to this
define( 'PAGES',      __DIR__ . "/sites/" );
```

Now you can edit and add Pages under the `sites` Folder. Don't forget to Edit the edit `styles.css` to fit your needs (Hint: If you copy the file and place a new one into the css Folder, only the new css File(s) will be loaded automaticly into the header section of the Template).


### Metrics ###

If you want to use the Visitor Metrics, you need to enable the sqlite Database in to the config file and have Setup a Database.


### SQLite3 Database ###

You an easily use the shipped SQLite3 Dateabase. Enable them into the `config.php` 

```php
// cahneg this
define( 'SQLITE_USE', false );
// to this
define( 'SQLITE_USE', true );
```

An example Database is placed under `inc/db/database.sqlite.example`, just copy them and make the Folder and the File writeable for the webserver:

	cp inc/db/database.sqlite.example inc/db/database.sqlite

The right command to set the Fileaccess should appear if you open the Site for the first time in a Browser after activating and copiing into place. Something like this:

	SQLite file not writeable by webserver user, please add write permissions to file and Folder!
	sudo chown -R www-data /var/www/Sites/basic/inc/db

You find also creation Schemas in the `assets` Folder.


## Updating ##

Updating a old Version which is installed via git command (which is recommend) is also straight forrward.

1. Check if the are any Overwrites by you into the Base Files `git status`
2. If you found `Untracked files`, you can ignore the Messages. Only Changes on Base Files will result in a merge conflict!  
3. If there are no changes found by git, just update by running `git pull`


See [git-merge](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/the-ultimate-guide-to-git-merge-and-git-rebase/) for more about how to merge your Setup and the base Setup.


## Content/Pages ##

First: You can use PHP Files. No static replace Content like "{{TITLE}}" or something.

If you just want to sendout html content, you can also, but you just have to keep the filenames Prefix `.php`!

Just place you PHP files into the `sites` Folder. All Content will be rendered inside of a Template. These Files will be find under `tpl` Folder and can also just edited like you want, they are also plain PHP Files. 


### Classes ###

The Templating is done by the two Classes `Sites.php`, wich load Content from the `sites` Folder and the `Template.php` Class, wich loads template Parts from `tpl` Folder and mainly combine all to the outputed HTML or Text.

#### Site.php ####

This Class read and parse the Content from the Files in the `sites` Folder. It also wraps the Content by the Template parts by using the `Template.php` Class.


#### Template.php ####

Read the content from the `tpl` Folder and combines them into a basic HTML Page. 


## Layout ##

You only have to place the file into the `css` or `js` Folder and the Template Class will render the neccessary Links into the Page head Section to include them. 

### CSS ###

A pure Layout is allready shiped by default. It uses the `style.css` inside of the `css` Folder and contains pure CSS. If there are other files in this Folder, the styles.css won't be used, so you can easily overwrite the default layout by your own.

### HTML ###

The layout of outputed html is controlled by the Files into the `tpl` Folder and the class `Template.php`. 

### JavaScript ###

The Base Template contains some JavaScript Files for clock, pageload and to highlight the current navigation link. 
All files will be added to page head by `tpl/head.php`


## Application Exporter ##

The Application has a Prometheus ready scrape target url on where it can find some Metrics when requesting the metrics Page

	http(s)://domain.tld/basic/?page=metrics

All Metrics will be named by the Application `SHORTNAME`, wich is the Besefolder Page name (default might be `basic`).


- basic_info = like current Version and Application Domain
- basic_pages = Amount of Files/Pages in the configured PAGES destination Folder and the Localpath.
- basic_commits = Amount of git Commits
- basic_appsize = Total Size of the Application
- basic_todos = amount of TODO mentions in the Code
- basic_updates = Are there a new Version available on github
- 

You can use my `PHP Applications` Dasboard as Dashboard Example: [dashboard](https://github.com/vaddi/basic/tree/main/inc/asset/dashboard.json)

The Exprter can turned off by Set Config Constant `METRICS` to false.

## Known Bugs ##

Bugs can also be Reported under: [git-issues](https://github.com/vaddi/basic/issues)



## Links ##

- [git-merge](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/the-ultimate-guide-to-git-merge-and-git-rebase/)
- [git-issues](https://github.com/vaddi/basic/issues)
- [demo-page](https://www.mvattersen.de/basic)
- [dashboard](https://github.com/vaddi/basic/tree/main/inc/asset/dashboard.json)

Commit message:

Fix Block Codeblocks into documentation.php Page

README.md, after:

# Simple PHP Basic Template #

A Simple plain PHP Templating Engine. You can see a running Application on [demo-page](https://www.mvattersen.de/basic).


### Dependencies ###

A running PHP Webserver (A space where you can place PHP Files). I've testet on **apache2** and **nginx** Servers. The Packagenames can variate a little, depending on you operation System:

Neccessarry Pakages:

- php > 7.1
- php_curl

Optional (but usefull) packages:

- git
- php_sqlite3


## Installation ##

Installation ist straight forrward. You just need to clone the current Repossitory:

	git clone https://github.com/vaddi/basic.git

After getting the Base Application, you should copy the `pages` Folder to `sites` to use this for your own Pages:

	cp -r inc/pages inc/sites

Copy the config file:

	cp inc/config.php.example inc/config.php

And Edit the `inc/config.php` File:

```php
// change this
define( 'PAGES',      __DIR__ . "/pages/" );
// to this
define( 'PAGES',      __DIR__ . "/sites/" );
```

Now you can edit and add Pages under the `sites` Folder. Don't forget to Edit the edit `styles.css` to fit your needs (Hint: If you copy the file and place a new one into the css Folder, only the new css File(s) will be loaded automaticly into the header section of the Template).


### Metrics ###

If you want to use the Visitor Metrics, you need to enable the sqlite Database in to the config file and have Setup a Database.


### SQLite3 Database ###

You an easily use the shipped SQLite3 Dateabase. Enable them into the `config.php` 

```php
// change this
define( 'SQLITE_USE', false );
// to this
define( 'SQLITE_USE', true );
```

An example Database is placed under `inc/db/database.sqlite.example`, just copy them and make the Folder and the File writeable for the webserver:

	cp inc/db/database.sqlite.example inc/db/database.sqlite

The right command to set the Fileaccess should appear if you open the Site for the first time in a Browser after activating and copiing into place. Something like this:

	SQLite file not writeable by webserver user, please add write permissions to file and Folder!
	sudo chown -R www-data /var/www/Sites/basic/inc/db

You find also creation Schemas in the `assets` Folder.


## Updating ##

Updating a old Version which is installed via git command (which is recommend) is also straight forrward.

1. Check if the are any Overwrites by you into the Base Files `git status`
2. If you found `Untracked files`, you can ignore the Messages. Only Changes on Base Files will result in a merge conflict!  
3. If there are no changes found by git, just update by running `git pull`


See [git-merge](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/the-ultimate-guide-to-git-merge-and-git-rebase/) for more about how to merge your Setup and the base Setup.


## Content/Pages ##

First: You can use PHP Files. No static replace Content like "{{TITLE}}" or something.

If you just want to sendout html content, you can also, but you just have to keep the filenames Prefix `.php`!

Just place you PHP files into the `sites` Folder. All Content will be rendered inside of a Template. These Files will be find under `tpl` Folder and can also just edited like you want, they are also plain PHP Files. 


### Classes ###

The Templating is done by the two Classes `Sites.php`, wich load Content from the `sites` Folder and the `Template.php` Class, wich loads template Parts from `tpl` Folder and mainly combine all to the outputed HTML or Text.


#### Site.php ####

This Class read and parse the Content from the Files in the `sites` Folder. It also wraps the Content by the Template parts by using the `Template.php` Class.


#### Template.php ####

Read the content from the `tpl` Folder and combines them into a basic HTML Page. 


#### Extension Classes ####

You can extend your own classes by place them into the Folder `inc/class/extensions/`. There are also some other Helper Classes which will be used by the Application. 

All Classes under the extensions Folder will be automaticly instanciated by the `Base.php` Class by the PHP `spl_autoload_register` function in the Head of the Page.

To get a simple description, add a Comment in line 3 of your Class. This will be used in the Class page as description of your Class and help you to keep in mind what a Class is used for.


## Layout ##

You only have to place the file into the `css` or `js` Folder and the Template Class will render the neccessary Links into the Page head Section to include them. 


### CSS ###

A pure Layout is allready shiped by default. It uses the `style.css` inside of the `css` Folder and contains pure CSS. If there are other files in this Folder, the styles.css won't be used, so you can easily overwrite the default layout by your own.


### HTML ###

The layout of outputed html is controlled by the Files into the `tpl` Folder and the class `Template.php`. 


### JavaScript ###

The Base Template contains some JavaScript Files for clock, pageload and to highlight the current navigation link. 
All files will be added to page head by `tpl/head.php`


## Application Exporter ##

The Application has a Prometheus ready scrape target url on where it can find some Metrics when requesting the metrics Page

	http[s]://[domain.tld]/[appname]/?page=metrics

All Metrics will be named by the Application `SHORTNAME`, wich is the Besefolder Page name (default Name is `basic`).


- basic_info = like current Version and Application Domain
- basic_pages = Amount of Files/Pages in the configured PAGES destination Folder and the Localpath.
- basic_commits = Amount of git Commits
- basic_appsize = Total Size of the Application
- basic_todos = amount of TODO mentions in the Code
- basic_updates = Are there a new Version available on github


You can use my `PHP Applications` Dasboard as Dashboard Example: [dashboard](https://github.com/vaddi/basic/tree/main/inc/asset/dashboard.json)

The Exprter can turned off by Set Config Constant `METRICS` to false into the `config.php` file.


## Known Bugs ##

Bugs can also be Reported under: [git-issues](https://github.com/vaddi/basic/issues)


## Links ##

- [git-merge](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/the-ultimate-guide-to-git-merge-and-git-rebase/)
- [git-issues](https://github.com/vaddi/basic/issues)
- [demo-page](https://www.mvattersen.de/basic)
- [dashboard](https://github.com/vaddi/basic/tree/main/inc/asset/dashboard.json)
